# Ed Atkins 

## Something is Missing 

https://vimeo.com/237373525 

https://aestheticamagazine.com/interview-with-ed-atkins-performance-capture-manchester-international-festival/ 

Atkins is an artist who works with text, song, digital graphics and 3D animation practices, amongst other mediums, to render short “chamber dramas” which incorporate thoughts on semiosis, signs, semantics, representation, the exploration of the self. Editing, writing, animation are all referred to as overlapping and entangled, in part due to his esoteric explorations of these themes, but also because of the unifying nature of how these pieces are developed, a confluence which happens at a laptop or desktop PC. They have a “similar sensation.” As such, these modes of expression, irrespective of their aesthetic, all begin similarly: at a desk, with a computer. The process underpinning such outcomes is thus extremely important, as the editing of something – a document, a keyframe, 3D geometry – the rhythm of creation is as important (or no less important) than any resolved process, which could constitute a more finalised or presentable outcome. In an interview in Aesthetica magazine, Atkin’s states the following: 

>The revelation [of process] can be just as much artifice, just as much a performance, as that which it is apparently the truth behind.< 

Atkins, when discussing the characters in his pieces, implies that they are “born dead”, which in part is an exploration of topics such as loss or melancholy or anxiety, that they are “generated from emptiness.” This is, for me, a highly contestable point; not that 3D models of humans should be considered as Frankenstein’s monster, virtual entities awaiting animation or corporeality, but that we can project qualities or containers of emotional prejudice onto virtual subjects. Are these models – for example virtual human-like meshes or virtual 3D spaces – not, in the time we invest in them as tools for learning or animation, not ‘lived in’? We might spend a month (or longer) painstakingly rendering the micro-nuances of a character mesh, for example; such a creation might be imbued with hours of research, they may even use our voices (like Atkin’s work), borrow our mannerisms with mo-cap, reflect the minutiae of our aesthetic application of realism as 3D practice, using our own skin or twitches, biotic glitches in their manifestation – are they still unreal, hollow (Stelarc), empty, dead in this reading? 

>[T]he render farm in the project – hundreds of racked PCs, churning through data, rendering (like glue, like entrails, like bones) every grotesque detail of the protagonist… that place is a place of deep, deep mystification; of godliness. The final film will contain its own truths and fallacies – truths about performance as a precondition of being in the world; about how performance, however, might be coopted and curtailed and rendered down to some other, insidiously consensual, a-political situation.< 

The idea of the render farm as guts is surprising as it determines the finality of something as having been embodied, as data, which conversely disembodies artistic process – something Atkins is so invested in exploring. The manipulation of sounds, of text, of virtual bones in a virtual mesh, if they can all be considered roughly equivalent, holistically speaking, why are the virtual elements – the spaces, the meshes – defined as emptiness? Is a word – the word for apple, in Arabic, or Sinhalese, or Mandarin – not just as empty, not just as disembodied when we cannot interpret it semiotically? Likewise a sound, removed from any contextual or known signifier, we can only define that noise (whatever it may be) as ‘sounds like’. There is a reverence given to sound and text because they inhabit the known real, whereas the virtual – its eddies and undercurrents of ambiguity and codedness – are less known. 

Another point I would like to make is in relation to the preciousness of the self that Atkins alludes to in both these interviews. He discusses narcissism, rejects the idea of the artist holding up the mirror to either themselves or society, because the mirror lies. He almost splits the word “representation” when doing so, it comes out as “re-presentation” as in recycled. Art, art practice, don’t necessarily hold up a mirror to the world – we can, in Atkins’ words – really only glean information about the artist themselves in critically analysing their work, their re-presentation of a synthesised body of information that is often esoteric. You can tell that he sees his practice as special, special in the sense that he tries to imbue it with truths – not ethical or political or aesthetic truths – but self-evident ones. The icon of the self, enshrined in an art practice that seeks to release, disentangle, embrace the self. Though of course, how an audience might interpret such a thing, and why you need to afford one the opportunity to consume such a spectacle, is, I would imagine, a daily problem. “Faithfulness to agency,” not to the realisation of dreams. 

>[I]t’s been important to retain things that only I know about, that only I know what the fuck I’m gibbering about. There’s an intimacy, an idiosyncrasy, a weirdness that I want to preserve.< 

This intimacy, weirdness, strangeness with one’s identity positions our intellect, our consciousness as Other – as something to problematise and document an awareness of - or is it our consciousness documenting an awareness of the body in relation to itself? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ 
