# Poor Theatre – Jerzy Grotowski 

## *Towards a poor theatre* & *The Theatre’s New Testament* (2002) 

 https://monoskop.org/images/e/e2/Grotowski_Jerzy_Towards_a_Poor_Theatre_2002.pdf 

 
Jerzy Grotowski was responsible for creating the Theatre Laboratory – an interrogative theatre collective which considered theatre, and by extension acting, a subject of research. Grotowski developed the ideology of ‘poor theatre,’ wherein studies of theatre "[seek] to define what is distinctively theatre, what separates this activity from other categories of performance and spectacle.” There is a focus on the transformative power of the relationship between actor and audience, less so on flashy props and sets. By all accounts, Grotowski was an atheist, but there are deep religious and spiritual themes discussed within his methods, likely due to his Catholic upbringing. As such, Grotowski uses doctrinal language throughout his work, where theatre practices, or the practice of theatre itself, is variously referred to as “communion” with a spectator (audience), “sacrilege,” “sacrifice.” 

>Theatre ‘cannot exist without the actor-spectator relationship of perceptual, direct, “live” communion’. 

Upon reading the above quote, I immediately had an image of myself, A. N. Other, sat, quietly transfixed, in direct “communion” with a phone or similar device - the device itself embodied light, pictures, sounds, social networks, games, a panoply of stimuli. Rapt in the glow of that interface, in direct communion with data – with information. Information as God. Here, the “data made flesh” (Gibson, Neuromancer) reasserts itself in dialectic communion with the consecration during Mass – the rite of transubstantiation. Where the body and blood of Christ are made manifest - flesh - after the ingestion of bread and wine. Data as incarnate, given web addresses, app caches, saved to sim; electronic signals which really do exist, tangibly, as interactions of code. 

>Artifice (articulation of a role by signs). 

>If the actor, by setting himself a challenge publicly challenges others, and through excess, profanation and outrageous sacrilege reveals himself by casting off his everyday mask, he makes it possible for the spectator to undertake a similar process of self-penetration. If he does not exhibit his body, but annihilates it, burns it, frees it from every resistance to any psychic impulse, then he does not sell his body but sacrifices it. 

The body here – the body presented as that of an actor in a thrilling act of effacement – is not, when revealing themselves as an actor, a performer of emotions, behaviours and their underlying causes, does not do this out of a desire to explore the artifice of such exercises. Through the “sacrilege” of performance, the actor asks that the audience themselves partake in this wilful act of communion, a dual act of self-penetration, whereby the signs of a role – its intended presentation of meaning, which if successful is reciprocated - become the signifier. Again, the spectral form of Baudrillard casts a long shadow here. The signs of the real replacing the real – the Hyperreal. Though not ad nauseum. Temporarily, which in itself – the word ‘role’ – has a temporality to it, something unfixed or untethered, something transformative. Evocative as opposed to permanent. 

The body as burned, as ‘freed’. Vita-More (also Stellarc) refers to the body itself as having the potential to become a prosthesis for tech. Are we, when we use tech, much as when we reconfigure ourselves in a given social circumstance – with modifications, sometimes knowingly, sometimes less so, to our behaviour, our body language and gestures – not adapting to the context of the platform we are using? Referred to as the *metabrain* our “personhood” is understood to be holistically complex, experiential, labyrinthine, but what if these modalities of behaviour could be coded as substrates – responsive identities that are informed by the full data of our personhood itself (the metabrain), but as extended, liberated, individuated, sentient expressions of our data self? The body as burned, freed. 

The juxtaposition of the ‘bodies’ of Man could be an interesting visualisation here, using mo cap, avatars, the real self as interfaced variously, connected variously.  

>The elaboration of artificiality is a question of ideograms - sounds and gestures - which evoke associations in the psyche of the audience. It is reminiscent of a sculptor's work on a block of stone: the conscious use of hammer and chisel. It consists, for instance, in the analysis of a hand's reflex during a psychic process and its successive development through shoulder, elbow, wrist and fingers in order to decide how each phase of this process can be expressed through a sign, an ideogram, which either instantly conveys the hidden motivations of the actor or polemizes against them. 

> [Cont.] This elaboration of artificiality - of the form's guiding rein - is often based on a conscious searching of our organism for forms whose outlines we feel although their reality still escapes us. One assumes that these forms already exist, complete, within our organism. Here we touch on a type of acting which, as an art, is closer to sculpture than to painting. Painting involves the addition of colours, whereas the sculptor takes away what is concealing the form which, as it were, already exists within the block of stone, thus revealing it instead of building it up. 

The creation of the sign, the depiction of some internal idea, given form as gesture or sound, as requiring ‘scuplting’, not merely mimesis. The portrayal of an emotional reaction to a stimulus as requiring both intense imagination, practice and then restraint – restraint for the many normative, hegemonic reasons that shape our expressions as display. There is no self, or little of the ‘true’ self in such an idea – when the world shapes us, as opposed to the reverse. Is this a part of the reason for certain online patterns or behaviour, or again, if we consider Twitter a cesspit, and contextualise it thus, are we then actively reconfiguring ourselves to use that plaform in such a way, or permitting an expression of ourselves which is otherwise inhibited? Is there a difference? If so, does the mask of artificilaity slip when we lose our “external discipline” online? So often, I have to remind students that they can’t express themselves in a certain way in class, or around their peers – that the use of certain language, or modes of conveyance, are inappropriate or ill-judged. I often say something like, ‘Look, you can’t say that – you're not online anymore!’ And by ‘online’ I mean engaged in a specific (likely inappropriate) forum, chat room or Discord with other users, rattling out expletives and memeified statements that are esoteric, infantile, profane or worse. But in this scenario, the classroom is only 15 hours of their week, so it’s a minority experience when ‘online’ is always at their fingertips, as well as one that is routinely invaded by the ‘online’. If those 15 hours are the mask (the symbolic “everyday”), how often is it on or off generally? It is often so much easier to share online. To over-share. To act out. To expose, test or invent new forms of the self. Are these interfaces, arrived at through tech, augmenting *and* enabling these individuated substrates of “personhood?” Or are these substrate identities merely an expression of signs – the artifice of context? 

When everyone else is acting on “excess” and “exposure,” there is that impulse - that desire - to join in. But when/where/how can you do that without shame, or fear of reproach or accountability? 1) As artifice (performatively, ironically). 2) In secret (anonymous, pseudonymous).  Tech can provide for both. But is it the medium that does this, or its users? If we give Man a drum, and the drum is banged, is the drum or the man responsible for the banging? Or is it the inventor of the drum whom we should condemn? 

If the body is a prosthesis for tech, is the mind a prosthesis for Online? 

>At any rate, the decisive principle remains the following: the more we become absorbed in what is hidden inside us, in the excess, in the exposure, in the self-penetration, the more rigid must be the external discipline; that is to say the form, the artificiality, the ideogram, the sign. Here lies the whole principle of expressiveness. 

 

 
