#Stanilavski, K (1989) An Actor Prepares. 

##Thoughts/attitudes on ‘props’ 

 

The wiki definition of a prop (Wikipedia, 2021) in *Theatrical Property* is inversely rhetorical: 

>A prop must "read well" from the house or on-screen, that is, it must be readily identifiable as its intended appearance. Many regular objects make for poor quality props due to their size, durability, or color under bright lights, so prop versions are often specially constructed versions of common objects.< 

The fact that a prop must be ‘easily identifiable’ as itself is a remarkable idea. Less so when allied to the locative idiosyncrasies of the theatre or stage – where stage lighting, audience distance from the stage and other eccentricities play a huge factor – but in its own right, there is an almost Baudrillardian quality to such a proposition; that an object on stage must be a simulacra in order to serve its intended purpose within the context of a play. That an object, after a change or varied changes, must pay homage to its true likeness in order to again be read as that likeness on stage. 

There are ways and means for “counteracting” such abstractions outlined in *An Actor Prepares*, where Stanislavski, through the instructions of the seemingly fictitious directors Tortsov and Rakhmanov, outlines methods for working with props. These exercises are seemingly broken down into two parts, though in this chapter, Concentration of Attention (CoA) – which is preceded by one called Imagination – the director outlines two methods of working with props for the actors. Initially, they are advised to hold an object, assigned at random, for a short period of time – a matter of seconds – with the aim to study this object intently. The lights are then turned off and they are expected to describe the specific physical qualities of the assigned object, with the whole exercise drawing a range of derisive responses once the lights are turned back on and their inadequate observations laid bare. This idea of building up a reservoir of understanding regarding a given object is important for two reasons: 1) it enables the actors, and by extension the audience, to imbue props with greater significance or ‘actuality’, and 2) these exercises, if practiced thoroughly, can enable the actor to perform without any visible/physical prop, if the learned reality or mimesis of experiencing an object is practiced naturally. Interestingly, this is referred to as ‘endowing’ objects with imaginary lives, or not, as the case may be – many objects are, within the chaotic sphere of our lives, on a spectrum of importance; all objects serve a purpose as, if nothing else, physical objects in close proximity to ourselves, though as potential signifiers, they can have enormous emotional potential – for actors and audience alike. 

Referring back to that idea of ‘endowment’ reminds me of (semantically at least) the use of ‘embodiment’ in Hayles’ *Virtual Bodies & Flickering Signifiers* (1993), which advances the idea that information or informatics can attain a ‘corporeal’ state within a virtual space. A thought I find entirely fascinating and correlational, for our experience of props within a dramatic context having the potential for emotional resonance and impact seems not only entirely reasonable, but also logical. We as humans are empathic creatures – it is laughable to assume that I might, as an individual, be the only seat in the audience engaging with an object on an emotional level if it has been placed or used just so – in such a deliberate way as to surely convey meaning, or engage ones subjectivity, beyond that of merely signifier. Hayles, while primarily discussing the tension between text as signifier and signified in digital or print mediums, through the analysis of certain key texts, notably Gibson’s *Neuromancer*, laterally posits the notion of a “computerised subjectivity”, where “Information is the putative origin, physicality the derivative manifestation”. If our subjectivity can be affected by real-world events (e.g. charity aid advert) or events of fiction (emotional scene within a dramatic context), could the hyperreality of a virtual space not ellicit the same – or similar – emotional responses? And would that data – emotional, qualitative responses (e.g. testimony) of those engaged with a virtual emotional event, brain scans – not prove that our subjectivity is something much more plastic, as something less concerned with context? The words that spring to mind are *perception* and *discernment*. If I can cry at a funeral, I can cry at the cinema, I can cry at the death of a beloved character in a game experienced through VR. In each scenario, my subjectivity is charged – it is adaptable, excited. The evidence of my physiological response to those stimuli will be physically apparent, through facial expressions, eye movements, mood patterns, nervous mannerisms… This is an area for further research, but it seems entirely reasonable that the aforementioned behaviours would present themselves in either of the three ‘I can cry at’ scenarios above. As Stanilavski says, 

>There is no such thing as actuality on the stage< 

And yet, we still feel – sense the verisimilitude of the moment. 

An additional key consideration outlined in CoA is that of lighting. Variously, assorted lights are turned on and off to create the illusion of small, medium and large lighting circles, named as such for the extent to which they narrow or focus the gaze. There is an interesting idea posited here, whereby the viewer, in this case the narrator, experiences the small circle’s glare on a surface, adorned with scant few objects.  

>The effect on me was like magic. All the little knick-knacks on the table drew my attention without any forcing< 

Tortsov further illumines (pardon the pun) his point by outlining the characteristic qualities of certain lighting forms, and their effects on actor and audience. 

>”When you have a spot of light surrounded by darkness,” he said, “all the objects inside of it draw your attention because everything outside it being invisible there is no attraction there. The outlines of such a circle are so sharp and the encircling shadow so solid that you have no desire to go beyond its limits. “When the lights are on you have an entirely different problem. As there is no obvious outline to your circle you are obliged to construct one mentally and not allow yourself to look beyond it. Your attention must now replace the light, holding you within certain limits, and this in spite of the drawing power of all sorts of objects now visible outside of it. Therefore since the conditions, with and without the spotlight, are opposite, the method of maintaining the circle must change.”< 

This exercise (the changing focal breadth of the lights) is allegorical, in that it is meant to visualise for the actors the importance that focusing their attention can have on a production, but its implications for rendering are obvious. The objects with the tightest beam, surrounded by the highest possible contrast (darkness), are embodied – they are given placement as signifiers. When widened to a medium or even large lens, the actors and – by extension – the audience are, as it states above, ‘obliged to construct’ a circle or area of interest, and that this focus (lighting) should be dynamically maintained. 

This idea – that of circle lighting – is of course a technique which is widely used in most dramatic media (as cinematography in cinema for instance), but also in games design and VFX, to direct the gaze, to highlight and spotlight essential methods of progression. A correlational technique to that of the small or medium circles when rendering still images or capturing photographs might involve ‘vignetting’ for example, or even depth of field, where blur is used to focus the gaze. 

There is an idea beginning to form here, where the importance of objects as actors themselves is explored, in a format that preserves their original likeness or further plays on that idea of props as looks like, as that of simulacra. This, allied to the focus of any stage actor or audience having their gaze channelled through the careful use of lighting, and the various methods for doing that, would be intriguing also. But there is also an informatics element at play, where the use of a virtual space or spaces could have potentially far-reaching production value – imagine a stage where there are no props, for example, except those that exist as simulacra, visualised on screens which act as cameras or windows into the imagined world of the character, who is lit starkly, enshrouded in darkness, his world realised through instantiated projections which could be understood to be his own eyes, could be the omniscient eyes of the world, could be cinematographic vignettes. A production that seeks to render the hyperreal as the perceived (by the audience) reality of a character, which the actor can, through breaking the paths of light from projectors, or by appearing on those screens as rendered by VR while on stage, shatter the illusion of. Shuffled feet appearing in real-time behind the image of a misplaced belt, or discarded crisp packet, traced within the confines of a room-scale VR setup. A VR hand clawing to deactivate an alarm clock, which mirrors the movement of an actor’s hand to a prop placement that doesn’t actually ‘exist’ on stage. Food for thought. 
