#Baudrillard, J. (1981) Simulation and Simulacra. 

Simulation and Simulacra comprises a compendium of essays that seek to outline Baudrillard’s ideology that there is no ‘real’, that nothing truly exists as we think it does – that there is only the signified and that worse, our understanding of the world is divorced from its true origins of meaning, because of pervasive models of culture, language and capital, all of which have rendered the real itself as dead, something that can only glimpsed – if at all – with the intellect. Baudrillard also formulates the “stages” of (1. Faithful copy; 2. Unfaithful copy; 3. Pretend copy; 4. Simulacrum, which bears no relation to any copy) and latterly the “order” of simulacra, which are listed as: 

First Order: Representation is unfaithful – the sign is intended to produce meanings. 

Second Order: Mass production, which replaces the authority of the original through 		imitation. 

Third Order: The real and imagined are indistinguishable, ‘real’ and ‘fake’ have vanished. 

Enter the hyperreal, where the reality of existence bears no relation to any original precept, and where equivalency is impossible, so far removed are we from the true, objective reality of things that there is only the simulation – the replacement of the signs of the real with the hyperreal. 

>[S]imulation threatens the difference  between the "true" and the "false," the "real" and  the "imaginary."< 

Baudrillard uses the term “the reality principle” to outline the quandary of simulation, which is portrayed in somewhat devious terms. For something to be qualified as ‘real’, we must in turn be able to designate a thing a ‘false’ or ‘imaginary’, ergo reality exists as a dichotomy, which is inclusive of the Real and False. The simulation threatens this dichotomy as – using the example of a worker who feigns illness, and yet manages to manifest the signs of illness – if we can quantify the real as imagined and vice versa, and if the signs of either state are substituted and as such verifiable, how do we know which is which? Madness! 

>It is no  longer  a question of imitation, nor duplication, nor even parody.  It is a question of  substituting  the signs of the real  for  the real, that is to say of an operation of deterring  every real  process via its operational  double,  a programmatic, metastable,  perfectly descriptive machine  that  offers  all  the signs of  the real  and  shortcircuits all its vicissitudes.< 

>Simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential being,  or a substance. It is the generation by models of a real without origin or reality:  a hyperreal.< 

Now the above quote is taken out of context somewhat, as the use of “models” was of course not originally intended to mean 3D models, for example, but unquestionably, presciently, we have – through advances in both computer hardware and software – reached a critical point within this discourse, where the “models” of the real to which Baudrillard refers (tangentially stated in paragraph one) are now a practicable reality in 3D simulation and rendering software, while technologies such as VR and AR have the ability to computerise our subjectivity (Hayles, 1993). 

>No more mirror of being and  appearances, of the real and its concept. No more imaginary coextensivity:  it is genetic miniaturization that is the dimension of simulation. The real is  produced from miniaturized cells, matrices, and memory banks, models  of  control - and  it can  be reproduced an  indefinite number of times  from  these.  It no longer needs to be rational, because it no  longer measures itself against either an ideal  or  negative instance. It  is  no  longer  anything but  operational.  In fact, it is no longer really the real, because no  imaginary envelops it  anymore. It  is  a hyperreal, produced  from a radiating  synthesis of combinatory  models in a hyperspace without  atmosphere.< 

The phrase, “no imaginary envelops [the real] anymore” is indicative of Giralt’s (2017) statement in their essay on the *Interchangeability of VFX and Live Action and Its Implications for Realism*, where he opines: 

>[E]very fact requires a fiction to explain it, and every fiction requires a fact to support it.< 

I could, for example, render an improbable close-up of a dolphin cruising through the ocean, using a variety of discernibly ‘real’ modelling, texturing and lighting techniques to develop this sequence, creating in the process a hyperreal simulation of a dolphin in appreciably logical environs. The fact, here, is that dolphins look like dolphins and that generally they live in the sea. The fiction is that this sequence is of course a simulation – that such a close-up shot of a dolphin would be impossible to achieve even with advanced camera techniques. “Rationally” such a thing shouldn’t be possible, but our perception of reality is so mediated, so far removed from “being and appearances” that our subjectivity in this instance “no longer measures itself against either an ideal or negative” as it exists in a state of permanent subordination. We slavishly accept the real that we are confronted with, as simulacrum or simulation, as immediate and without pretension. Of film, Baudrillard writes: 

>The cinema in its current  efforts is getting closer and  closer, and  with  greater and  greater perfection,  to the absolute real, in its banality,  its veracity,  in its naked obviousness, in its boredom, and  at  the same time  in its presumption, in its pretension to being  the real, the immediate, the unsignified, which is the  craziest  of undertakings.< 

This idea of “naked obviousness” is particularly important to my thesis, and further endorses the platitude of “punctilious photorealistic realism” instantiated by Giralt (2017). To ensure veracity and momentary immersion, whether it is later speculatively interrogated or disqualified, there are aesthetic qualities which must subvert the criticism of technique – and here I would call to the practice of “invisible VFX” (Giralt, 2017) again, where the humdrum, the commonplace, the quintessential, the ‘boring’ objects of our lives are rendered so exquisitely and yet so unobtrusively as to contribute nothing but their presence – the simulcra of everyday life. To Baudrillard, whether something has the appearance of a copy, or is indistinguishable from the original as a copy, is semantic, as both are simulacra. Baudrillard refers to the ‘neofigurative’ movement in art (a term used to inform abstracted renderings of figurative subjects) as a means by which to condemn the hyperreal subject analogously. 

>Neofiguration is an invocation of resemblance,  but  at  the same time  the flagrant  proof of the disappearance  of  objects in their very  representation: hyperreal.  Therein objects shine in a sort of  hyperresemblance  (like history in contemporary cinema) that  makes  it so that fundamentally they no  longer resemble  anything, except  the empty  figure of  resemblance, the empty form  of  representation.< 

Is resemblance so unimportant? Cast here as “empty”, they “shine” in their hyperresemblance. I cannot help but think about the histories of objects, something I imagine Baudrillard would think of as being highly erroneous. As a digital artist, there is a tension between the first and fourth stages of simulacra – where objects can exist as banal signifieds, devoid of any semblance of qualitative reality, or as “good” representations. Does the history of an object change this, if it can be said to have one, or does it just help mask the “models” of subversion which are at play? Recently, I went to purchase a swimming aid for my daughter – a shark’s fin buoyancy aid which is strapped to the child’s back. Curious in its symbolism: sharks as predators, man-eaters, though in reality simply ancient hunters enshrined in media-created stigmas. Yet, in the ‘for sale’ photographs of the object, there was quite clearly a bite mark in the fin itself, which after collecting, was much more ingrained than I was anticipating, the camber of a small mouth with its many pointed indentations having made pretty deep gashes in one side of the fin, without (thankfully) impacting on its utility as a floatation device.  This fin is, undeniably, an artifact of the second order, a mass-produced object, as removed from the shark’s fin as the very first foam-moulded copy was for the copy I purchased - but does the indelibility of the bite mark it carries change our perception of it? Can we understand meaning in this way using Baudrillard? Can an object’s history, whether it can be considered  simulacra or simulation in the first instance, subvert the constraints of the latter? The journey of an object through time and space is surely the truest embodiment of the latter as discernible, as real, surely? Unless this is the hyperbole of the first order simulacra! 

>Here and there, a single nebula whose simple elements are indecipherable, whose truth is indecipherable.< 

Latterly, Baudrillard’s writing on the “Hologram” is fascinating for its explication of the practice of representationality as requiring some illusoriness in order for it to retain a fuller, arguably more real existence. I am again reminded of the quote lifted from the wiki site on props, where the likeness of something is defined as needing to be “readily identifiable as its intended appearance”. 

>Similitude is a dream and  must remain one, in order  for a modicum of illusion and  a stage of  the imaginary to exist. One must never pass over to the side of the real, the side of the exact  resemblance of the world  to itself, of  the subject to itself. Because  then the image disappears.  One must  never pass  over to the side of  the double, because then the dual  relation disappears,  and  with  it all seduction.< 

It is something to note, from a practical perspective, this idea of “exact resemblance” as divested from its original, as lesser than or lacking – whether as simulacra and/or simulation – though this could be an important method in the act or art of representation. Detailing the minutiae of a 3D asset or prop for example, with highly sophisticated methods, is dangerous, as we lose the relation of “the subject to itself” – which is pure simulation. The real is replaced with the signs of the real; though this would be a fantastic challenge. Leaving some space for the imagination to craft attributional qualities could engender more immersively readable artifacts however. 

I 

 
