#Giralt, G. F. (2017) *The Interchangeability of VFX and Live Action and Its Implications for Realism* 

‘Realism’ as the intent of VFX is explored variously in this article. It aims to situate the motivation of VFX artists as competitors in a “rivalry” of contiguous improvement, and discusses the impact of their role in conjunction with more traditional filmic disciplines, such as cinematography. The article begins by attempting to provide a distinction for reality itself, in objective terms, which is positioned as ‘life beyond the lens’ – unfiltered and raw, in all its patternless wonder and spontaneity. This is something which the artist – variously defined as belonging to VFX, painting, photographic, cinematographic disciplines – however well intentioned, obfuscates. As soon as the artist intervenes at the juncture of depiction, what is left is realism within the constricts of subjectivity – that is, the artist, defined as someone with an artistic determination to represent the ‘real’, can only render the formal elements of a “personalised encounter” with their subject, not the subject itself. 

>What is left is  a testimony  of  the artist’s  personalized encounter with reality—the image, an image that,  no matter how realistic  it  may  appear, gives away  the fact  that  there is  no candid camera. That  is, the camera lens  “sees” candidly  what “is” in front  of  it, but  the transposition of  light< 

Such attempts at depiction are further elucidated as: 

>the optical attributes embedded in the image itself [to engender] a  visual  narration that  reflects  the filmmaker’s preferences  and perspective.< 

Another interesting argument it espouses concerns the veracity of the artist’s intentions when tasked with depicting the ‘real’. VFX artists are praised for their study of the real, which it could be argued far surpasses that of the aesthetic implications of the work itself, as they approach this act of “mimesis” with “keen fascination”. 

>[T]he eye of  the  visual  digital  artist resembles  that  of  a cinematographer. He or she seeks to peer deeply  into nature’s  spontaneity in order to discern the intricacies  of  color  variations  in relation to light  and movement,  as  well as  the movement  of  things  through space, so that  layer upon layer of  visual  data can digitally emulate and simulate in some relevant measure the reality  as  seen through a lens.< 

The VFX artist, as practitioners that strive to immersively simulate the real – by always studying the real: the raw real, the real without pattern or order, the random and spontaneous real of life as we know it – are arbiters of the real. The use of “synthetic” methods, such as in-engine simulations of random effects derived from code are also referred to as “calculated”, further supporting the human intellect as the key driver in computing the real – for example, a naturalistic flight of a swarm of birds, or the movement of a bee from flowerhead to flowerhead – are better described by the subjectivity of the artist than those of computer-aided simulations. Here, the VFX artist becomes the author of the hyperreal. 

>If realism is  interested in reality  as  we experience it, the interest  in photorealistic representation is  the desire to be convincing to the point of  becoming a substitute for the real< 

It also highlights a central tenet of the VFX as intent on achieving “invisible effects” in many productions, which is something of vital importance to my own practical intentions. Many media productions, if not the majority, now incorporate some element of VFX, for a variety of practical, dramatic, functional or budgetary reasons, with the overall effect remaining unnoticed. As an example, a friend of mine – a working VFX artist – was responsible for 3D modelling and compositing a bookshelf onto a wall in Matt Reeves (2008) monster-genre film *Cloverfield*. In the scene, several protagonists burst through the door of a high-rise apartment in search of a missing friend, as New York is terrorized by a massive Godzilla-like creature. On discovering this, my first question was of course, ‘Why didn’t they just hang a bookshelf there?’ which elicited a variety of replies, none of which were especially edifying. There could be an argument made against VFX here, as ‘CGI for CGIs sake’, but that is transgressional to my point – the subtleties of lighting and object, masked by motion blur and the far more important (narratively at least) action of the players themselves render this bookshel as distinctively unobtrusive. It belies the point concerning the technological advancement of such techniques as processes, intimating that we are now well into a post-VFX-as-quantifiably-real discourse, where the audience, as observers of the real as documented by the camera and the multitude of applied VFX techniques, experience VFX [at least sometimes] passively – as something that has, in a certain filmic context, blurred the lines between simulacra and the real object or subject. 

The challenge here is that images are an absolute render of an objectively experienced 3D world confined to a 2D space (or ‘image-repertoire (Barthes, 1984)). This reduced dimensionality constricts our perception of a given volume (3D space rendered as a 2D image) – whereas the rendering engine itself, capable of simulating a 3D virtual space should, in theory, be a far more persuasive method for defining the subject and object within a hyperreal enquiry – where enquiry is defined as an attempt to engineer a simulation of subject or object as spatially and aesthetically indistinguishable from objective reality. 

If the technological means by which we could activate such a simulation themselves were indebted to these ideas of the ‘invisible’ or ‘passive’, or in some obverse way be subverted within traditional 2D rendering methods, what would the effect be? I am of course talking about immersion and discernment. Would our subjectivity, which is not bound by the framework of objective reality (Hayles, 1993), without the complication of pausing to engage with technology, or to initialise software – if the methods of transposing/fracturing/engaging our subjectivity were unexpected – could that actuate true immersion? 

 
